Isn't it amazing? A tabloid newspaper runs a story,
calls it Climate Gate 2, and the blogosphere lights up.
According to the Mail, a retired scientist who worked for the NCEI,
the National Centres for Environmental Information, said Noah breached protocol
by fast-forwarding a flawed scientific paper that artificially raised temperatures
and artificially erased the so-called pause in global warming.
And without bothering to check the accuracy of the story, which comes from a newspaper
famous for reporting a 50-foot crab off the coast of Whitstable, and a reporter with a
history of making up spurious stories about climate science, bloggers and politicians
announced it was all true. I thank Dr John Bates for courageously stepping forward to
tell the truth about Noah's senior officials playing fast and loose with the data in order
to meet a politically pre-determined conclusion. This endorsement came not from a blogger,
but from senior members of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology in Congress,
within hours of publication and without even the need to check the story.
So let's check it for them.
There are two issues here. One is whether Noah fast-forwarded publication to get the paper
published in time for the Paris climate meeting. That may be best answered by the publisher itself,
Science, whose editor sent a copy of his email exchange with the Mail's reporter to Roz Pidcock.
According to Science, the Noah paper by Tom Karl et al. took six months to thoroughly peer review,
two months longer than normal, and all of the data were publicly available prior to publication.
That sheds a bit more light on whether the paper was fast-forwarded,
but none of this information was in the Mail story.
Of course that doesn't mean protocols weren't breached,
and that's a serious question and one that needs to be properly investigated.
The other issue is whether the paper was flawed, and that's much easier to determine.
The Karl paper explained that the so-called pause in global warming
was probably the result of erroneous ocean temperature measurements.
The pause refers to a slowdown at the beginning of this century
in the rate of warming of the atmosphere, where about 8% of global warming is going.
90% is going into the oceans.
To put it simply, the trend line appears to go up more steeply in the 90s than in the noughties.
So a lot of studies have been done by lots of different scientific institutions
to try to find out why the atmospheric trend line changed,
and it turns out to be most likely a combination of factors.
Lower solar output, increasing aerosol pollution,
and the transfer of extra heat into the oceans all play a part.
And it was this transfer of heat into the oceans that NOAA was mostly concerned with,
because that would show up in higher sea surface temperatures.
In the old days, this temperature reading was always taken on ships.
Then a system of buoys was set up to take these measurements.
But researchers noticed a problem.
The measurements from the ships was recording slightly higher temperatures than the buoys,
because the intake of seawater was near the hot engine room.
And as the number of readings from buoys increased,
that difference, called a bias, was influencing the trend line.
So crudely put, it goes like this.
Temperature reading from a ship, temperature reading from a ship, temperature reading from a ship.
Then we switch to a temperature reading from a buoy, and another reading from a buoy.
Now obviously the ocean hasn't suddenly cooled, but if you publish this as a temperature graph,
then it's going to look as though it has, so the data has to be adjusted.
This is what caused consternation in the blogosphere,
because those who don't understand the difference between temperature anomalies and trend lines
thought NOAA was deliberately trying to push up temperatures.
But according to the Mail, this newspaper has learnt that NOAA has now decided that the sea
data set will have to be replaced and substantially revised just 18 months after it was issued,
because it used unreliable methods which overstated the speed of warming.
Well, the Mail may have just found out about it, but it wasn't a surprise to everybody else.
The 2015 results were part of an ongoing series of studies
under a programme called Extended Reconstruction Sea Surface Temperature, or IRST for short.
The 2015 results were called IRST4, updating the previously much less accurate IRST3B.
And when IRST5 comes out, that's the new data set the Mail is referring to,
it'll be more accurate still. A preliminary report suggests it'll bring the trend down
about 10% from IRST4, but it'll still be about 50% up from IRST3B.
So contrary to the Mail's claim, IRST5 isn't being published because IRST4 used unreliable methods
or overstated the speed of warming. It'll be published because it's part of a continuous
process of updating and increasing the accuracy of data.
Science rarely has eureka moments, it just gets more and more accurate,
as more and better measurements are taken. IRST5 will itself be replaced by IRST6.
So the updating of information is not evidence that the data set was flawed,
let alone fraudulently manipulated. Perhaps the most damning evidence for
that is this quote in the Mail story, supposedly from John Bates.
He said,
It's a line that's been repeated by bloggers, newspapers and TV networks that regularly run
stories trying to undermine climate science. But did Bates really say that?
David Rose has been accused of making up quotes by someone he interviewed before,
and if he follows past practice, he'll refuse to release his notes or recordings of the Bates
interview for verification. But fortunately, we can check what
Bates actually did say on the subject elsewhere, without having David Rose act as our rather
questionable interpreter. In his own words, on a climate blog run by Judith Curry,
Bates explains the problem he has with the Carl paper and the archiving of the IRST4 data set.
This was posted just before the Mail published its story,
and the contrast is revealing. The link to this is in my video description,
so take the time to read it. You'll see why the Mail chose to embellish Bates' actual complaints,
because his actual complaints would have put their readers to sleep and not cause much of a stir.
So what does Bates have to say about, they had good data from buoys and they threw it out?
Funnily enough, absolutely nothing. His only mention of the procedure is here,
and it's purely factual. For ocean temperatures, the IRST4 is used in the K15 paper,
that's the Carl paper, and represents a major update from the previous version.
The bias correction procedure was changed, and this resulted in different SST anomalies
and different trends during the last 15 plus years relative to IRST3. Which of course is all true,
and he certainly doesn't suggest good data from buoys was thrown out.
And since the Mail story was published, Bates has reportedly told ClimateWire that he's not
suggesting any malfeasance. The issue here is not an issue of tampering with data, but rather
really of timing of a release of a paper that had not properly disclosed everything it was, he said.
And he told Associated Press the same thing.
It's really a story of not disclosing what you did, Bates said in the interview,
it's not trumped up data in any way, shape or form. But whether Bates said Noah was throwing
out good data or Rose did, it's complete nonsense anyway. Noah didn't throw out the good data from
buoys at all, they did completely the opposite. Instead of relying mostly on ship data, IRST4
researchers overwhelmingly favoured data from buoys, as is explained in all the published
research. And if the reference to changing good data is a reference to adjusting the temperature
data to take account of the difference between ships and buoys, then it's absurd to claim that
this is throwing out good data. No one in climate research disagrees with the decision to eliminate
the bias, not even Bates. If it hadn't been done, the record would be showing a spurious temperature
drop, which I'm sure is what David Rose would like to see, but it doesn't match reality.
Whatever objections Rose has to the way it was done, the way it was done turned out to be right.
A January 2017 paper by Zeke Housefather et al. confirmed the validity of the Noah adjustments,
and concluded that they agreed with what other scientific institutions had found,
including Berkeley Earth, the Hadley Centre in the UK, and the Japan Meteorological Agency.
All get the same results as Noah. Rose tried to substantiate his claims with a graph,
which purports to show that Noah is fraudulently raising temperatures. In fact, all it shows is
that the male doesn't understand temperature reconstructions. They're not showing global
temperatures, they're showing global temperature anomalies. Different institutions use different
baselines. That makes no difference to absolute temperatures or temperature trends. These graphs
show the variance of those temperatures from different averages in the past. Hadley uses
the baseline 1961 to 1990, while Noah uses the baseline 1901 to 2000. Putting these together
without adjusting the baseline is like putting two graphs together, one measuring Fahrenheit
and the other measuring centigrade and claiming that the Fahrenheit graph shows more warming.
The male also claims, in the caption, that the graph reveals that Noah has been adjusted
to show a steeper warming trend. But of course it does nothing of the sort. All it reveals is that
the male doesn't understand how to put two graphs on the same baseline, so that we can compare them
and see what the trend is. Fortunately for us, Housefather has done just that. And guess what?
The trend is exactly the same. Why didn't the male put the two graphs on the same baseline?
Because if they had, they would have proved that the Noah dataset agrees perfectly with verified
data from Hadley. And that's not the conclusion their readers want to hear. Taken together with
the land data, the Noah trend again shows no slowdown in global warming. Not just from Noah,
but from other scientific institutions as well, like Berkeley Earth, NASA and
Canton and Way. They all show no global warming pause. There are a lot more errors in the male
story, and if I was doing my usual month-long investigation, I'd go in-depth and pick it apart
in more detail. But at least I've done some checking, which is more than can be said for
the bloggers and the politicians who immediately proclaimed the story true. So I'm not saying
accusations by tabloid newspapers should be dismissed, but they should at least be checked,
especially those with a history of getting their facts wrong. What's really shocking is that the
House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, which oversees science on behalf of the most
powerful country in the world, is happy to blindly believe a tabloid newspaper that says Noah got it
wrong, rather than peer-reviewed scientific papers that verified Noah's conclusions,
and scientific institutions around the world that got exactly the same results.
Maybe the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology's next job
should be to prepare defences against Crabzilla. It must be true. It's in the mail.